I want you to imagine the following
situation your company is putting on a
conference for your clients and you're
planning on simply going to support and
attend this basically be a listener in
the audience but as you walk through the
conference doors a little bit early your
boss walks up to you and says here's
what happened your senior colleague has
come down Sick in about an hour is when
he or she was supposed to present can
you please cover for them
other than Panic what do you do now
thankfully the hypothetical situation I
posed the beginning of this video is a
pretty rare one that's not going to
happen very often but it does happen
from time to time I've seen this
firsthand and so in this video I'm going
to give you a couple of tips of how you
could deal with this situation or any
hypothetical situation where you were
asked or expected to deliver a speech
while having very little time or notice
or ability to prepare to do so the first
thing I'd suggest in this situation is
to start off by giving yourself a little
bit of Grace and knowing that you've
been thrown in a tough spot if you were
not preparing to speak and then all of a
sudden you've been told you've got to
present for half an hour 1 hour from now
and maybe on a subject that you're not
overly overly familiar with that is a
tricky situation that is scary for
anybody please know that you are not
expected to deliver the perfect speech
that is going to get a standing ovation
at that point the goal is to just get
through it and hopefully the audience
won't even notice that there was a
hiccup that happened with the original
agenda if you can make them believe that
you were always supposed to deliver that
presentation and you got through it that
is a home run as far as I'm concerned
that is almost the ultimate goal so give
yourself Grace don't set your
expectations too crazy high but with
that said the next few tips will show
you how you can get through this
situation my first suggestion is to make
the speech your own that is tough given
the time constraints and everything
along those lines but if you have a
chance let's say your colleague had used
a PowerPoint presentation don't just use
their slides if you have a chance to
quickly even if it's 15 minutes go and
make some edits or change around their
slides a little bit remove a few slides
do that because the more you feel like
the presentation was built by you rather
than somebody else that is going to help
you in your speech I've seen many people
try to inherit other people's
presentations and it's so difficult and
it's often painful to watch this because
it's almost like they're seeing the
slides for their first time as well and
they're reading all of the words off of
the slides and that's not where your
focus and attention should be the slides
are for your audience you shouldn't be
referencing those too much you should be
looking at them and speaking and if
there's specific data points that are
really important that you're going to
forget of course keep those on the
slides and you can look back to
reference those specific numbers that
are very important but if these are
generally just themes like if you're
talking about how your company's
performance was the previous year and
you generally know the answer to that
your slide can simply say company
performance in 2022 or whatever the year
was like that's all the slide has to say
and that will trigger you to know okay
now is when I share the information I
know about how our company did last year
and hopefully if your boss is asking you
to take on this presentation he or she
has a bit of confidence in you that you
generally know the subject matter so in
that case make the slides as brief as
possible and make sure that you have
your touch on them that you're adding
your own language so that it feels as
much like your presentation as possible
one of the best tips I can give you for
delivering a speech on short notice is
to include personal stories personal
stories are great because you've already
sort of tested them if these are stories
you've told to to family or friends in
the past you've kind of received a
sample siiz audience and how their
feedback has been on that speech and if
they laughed or told you it was a great
story you know you've already got some
validation that that could work well in
the speech as long as it relates to
whatever the subject matter is but you'd
be surprised how often you can make that
connection even if it's a loose
connection often you can use a personal
story and reinforce a point of that
story and then connect it to whatever it
is you're trying to communicate so if
you're in a pinch definitely definitely
think about how you could incorporate a
personal story that you've already told
in the past and then as for your slides
especially if you have the chance to
make some brief edits to the slides all
you need is a photo an image a couple
words that trigger your memory to say oh
okay now is the time I tell the personal
story before I move to the next slide
that's all you need in terms of what you
add to the PowerPoint presentation the
other great thing about personal stories
is that they're going to fill up some of
that time if you have a half hour speech
that you need to step in for that's a
lot of time to just be standing in front
of the audience talking about
information you weren't planning to talk
about but if you can add a couple
personal stories that may take up 40% of
the time you're scheduled to speech so
now you're not worried about the full
half an hour you're worried about a
smaller portion in filling that up so
personal Stories the best thing you
could do when it comes to delivering a
speech on short notice if you're really
thrown under the bus and you have no
opportunity to make any changes to the
slides and you don't know a ton of
information about what the slides are
and it's simply just trying to hold all
of this together you may be able to use
a little bit of humor to make light of
the situation and I say this suggestion
cautiously because considering this is a
work or a professional event you don't
want to come across as amateur or make
excuses for the situation that you're in
so tread carefully when it comes to this
but you may be able to inject a little
bit of humor and I'll use a personal
example a few months ago I had the
situation where a coworker asked me to
step in in for his presentation at one
of my 9-to-5 work events that's in the
real estate industry and so I did that
for him but I literally didn't know what
the slides were and the joke I made was
that James Cordon who's a talk show host
he had this section or the segment
called where's your Ted at and the idea
is that people would give a presentation
and then the slides would come up and
they would have no idea what the slide
was going to be and they had to just
roll with it and it was usually
outrageous things and so that's how I
opened it up to the audience is saying
basically welcome to my version of where
is your Ted at I'm going to learn with
you what these slides are let's roll
through and thankfully I had a bit of
background knowledge about what the
individual was presenting on so it
wasn't completely on the fly but the
audience related they knew the spot I
was in and it got a few laughs and I was
able to get through the presentation
that way here's my last tip and some of
you may push back on this and not like
what I have to say but my tip is be
prepared but wait how can we be prepared
to this hypothetical situation that we
had no idea we were going to have to
step in for a colleague that we didn't
know was going to be sick are you crazy
how can you prepare for that sometimes
we have opportunities
to have something on the back burner and
be ready and every situation is going to
be a little bit different sometimes
you're completely blindsided but in this
hypothetical let's say your colleague
came into work earlier that week with a
bit of a sniffle in the back of your
mind you can say okay hopefully they're
okay for the big work conference but is
there a chance they might be sick and if
that's the case is there a chance my
boss may ask me as the ne next person
perhaps you're the second in command at
a
company know that in the back of your
mind try to think of okay is there a
situation where this could land on my
desk or on my plate in order of
something that needs to be done and if
the answer is even a 5% it's possible
then in your mind just have a little bit
of planning of well what would I do in
that situation what are some things I
could talk about how could I make it my
own and I can't tell you the number of
times that I even if it was me driving
to a work event or driving to a social
event where I thought maybe there's a
slight chance somebody asked me to say a
few words I thought in my head on that
drive what could I say and I come up
with something basic and 95% of the time
I've never used it I've never needed to
but the point is in that rare 5% of
opportunities the couple times it has
happened people are so impressed that it
looks like you're winging it but you get
through that situation with
professionalism
and people are blown away because that
is something not most people can do so
if at all possible prepare for the
unexpected prepare for the things you
can't really prepare for and just know
that maybe this is a situation that
could happen so what can you do from an
accountability standpoint to be as ready
as possible I hope this video on how to
come up with a presentation on a short
amount of notice has been beneficial to
you if it has please subscribe to my
channel turn on those
notifications let me know in the
comments has this happened to you what
do you think of my tips am I missing
anything all of that engagement helps my
channel so much thank you for taking the
time to watch this video thank you so
much for watching this video if you are
looking for a little bit of coaching
help with your next speech I am
providing oneon-one
evaluations my contact email is in the
video description reach out to me and
let's discuss what that could look like